---
layout: post
title: “Mudpuppy”
description: Mudpuppy
category: Amphibian
tags: [Amphibian]
comments: true
share: true
---


Mudpuppies are a species of salamander that starts their lifecycle as a 
tadpole and are completely aquatic, meaning that they spend the vast majority 
of their time in the water. While they are easy to care for if you have the 
proper provisions, they are also nocturnal meaning that they are usually only 
awake at night. This is an exotic pet and good for those who have the time 
and money to spend on them. They will grow to about 17 inches and then live 
for anywhere between 10 and 15 years.


## Shelter
Habitat is one of the most important aspects of owning a mudpuppy. You 
should start by getting a large aquarium, at least 20 gallons. This will need 
to be filed almost to the top, with two-thirds of the tank filled with water 
to prevent spillage. This water should be as close to 7.0 ph as possible, 
even if it means buying spring water. Use ph testing strips to test the 
water, and use acidifiers or bases to adjust it as needed, but consult a 
reptile and amphibian pet store beforehand.

The bottom of the habitat should be filled with gravel and other small 
rocks. You should also use driftwood, real or artificial, in order to give 
the mudpuppy a nice hiding space.

The water should be kept between the temperatures of 55 and 70 degrees. Make 
sure that you own a thermometer to check the temperature frequently.

You will also need a filtration system that is gated to prevent injuring 
your mudpuppy. 


## Diet
Mudpuppies prefer to have live food, and they are carnivores. They will 
survive comfortably on snails, larvae, and worms. You can also give them 
feeder fish such as minnows. The best part about feeding them minnows is that 
you can leave them in the tank and allow your mudpuppy decide when to eat 
them. 


## Activity/Exercise
Since they are aquatic animals, mudpuppies will spend most of their day 
swimming around, giving them all of the exercise that they need. Do not take 
your mudpuppy out of the water to handle it, they will suffocate. 


## Health
One of the biggest health concerns regarding mudpuppies is keeping the water 
clean. Bacteria thrive in water, and it can spread to your mudpuppy quickly. 
You need to find an exotic pet specialist that can help your mudpuppy if it 
becomes ill, as most veterinarians are not equipped to help mudpuppies or 
other amphibians.

Another consideration for the health of female mudpuppies is that they will 
lay eggs throughout their life that needs to be properly disposed of after 
they are laid. You can expect them to lay between 30 and 100 eggs a year. 


## Grooming
When it comes to cleaning the habitat, remove large debris daily and check 
the water filter.
Every 2 or 3 months, you must clean the entire habitat. You should use hot 
soapy water to clean the tank glass. Make sure that you rinse it in hot water 
when you are finished to remove the leftover soap. 

Replace the rocks in the habitat completely, and change the wood if it is 
real. Clean the artificial wood with hot water only. When you are finished, 
replace the water with the same type of water that you used to fill it 
initially. 

<sub>*Source: http://www.caudata.org/cc/species/Necturus/N_maculosus.shtml*</sub>